When you're a child, presuming that your parents
beat you…
Not everyone is beaten by their parents but
millions of us are…
You know, as soon as the child figures out
the look in the parent's eye that means you
are going to be beaten, then the look in the
eye is more terrifying than the stick or the
fist, because you know what that look in their
eye means.
First you learn to fear the stick, then you
learn to fear the fist, then you learn to
fear the look in a person's eye.
But then, as childhood goes on and you develop
more of an awareness of yourself, of your
own strength, of your own tenacity, of your
own own obduracy, of your own will; then you
move on, and you learn to feel contempt for
the threat, the look in the eye, the fist,
the stick.
Then you learn to appreciate a sense of your
own strength, of your own ability to overcome
that challenge.
The awareness that you can be whipped and
you can be beaten, and you're stronger than
that.
I got a reasonably profound question the last
time I was live-streaming and I thought I'd
make an effort to give it a reasonably profound
answer.
There was a question from the audience about
the meaning of happiness in my life and already
there's a sort of peculiar puzzle in the fact
that we're using the word happiness and not
the word satisfaction.
I think with happiness we almost have a double
meaning.
Is happiness something fleeting; is happiness
something durable; is happiness something
shallow or is happiness something profound.
And if we ask those same questions about satisfaction,
I think we'd actually come to very different
answers, even though happiness and satisfaction
are so closely linked in their meanings in
English language.
And this question is really interesting to
answer at this particular time in my life.
Right now I have custody of my daughter legally
for just 15 days.
I've flown to the South of France with my
girlfriend whom I'm very much in love with.
So I'm here with my girlfriend, under the
palm trees, on the beach, in an ostentatiously
beautiful part of the world, living a lifestyle
that many people might aspire to, or might
associate with the highest happiness possible.
This is sort of the land where there are flowers
in bloom all around me, birds singing in the
trees and we do indeed get to swim in the
azure ocean, these sorts of things.
Although if it were not for my daughter, I
would be doing none of it, because these are
not my priorities in life, this is not what
motivates me.
I would never go on vacation; that's why I
would never go on a beach vacation of any
kind.
If it weren't for my daughter, and these these
strange circumstances.
So the question of what is happiness and how
it shapes the behavior of other human beings
around me, and how it does and doesn't shape
my behavior, is something that's been on my
mind, along with the overweening questions
of duty, honor, and obligation, because obviously
my relationship with my daughter is very much
in my mind (day by day and in looking ahead
to the months and years in the future we're
trying to plan for, in trying to plan my education
and career for).
Many people watching this video will expect
me to answer (many people who are regular
viewers of mine, people who have known me
for a few years to whatever extent)… they're
probably expecting an answer that either comes
out of Schopenhauer's school of thought Schopenhauer's
school of philosophy (which I do actually
have some videos on) or reflecting my background
in Buddhism and Buddhist philosophy.
I was a scholar of Buddhism for many years
(I like to say 10 years for round numbers;
I want to think about how many years it was)…
especially Theravada Buddhism.
I learned to read Pali.
I did a lot of original scholarship and lived
in Buddhist countries and so on.
And you can say, to make a long story short,
that both the philosopy of Arthur Schopenhauer
and the philosophy of Buddhism at its core
(Theravada Buddhism especially) really do
depict happiness as a false God, as something
you should not plan your life around, as something
you should not allow to distort your goals
(as an intellectual or simply as a man).
That's not really the main message or theme
I'd want to reflect on here, although I'll
come back to it, because there there's some
sense in which my involvement with Buddhism
and my involvement with the philosophy of
Schopenhauer reflects certain aspects of my
character.
But you know, the people who are really close
to me, the people who know me in life and
not just on YouTube, they see me in circumstances
where other people would be struggling, where
other people would be suffering, where other
people were miserable, and I'm ebullient.
Ebullient meaning really happy; happy and
smiling and laughing and even singing.
My girlfriend and I went through a situation
in an airport recently, it was actually Bangkok
Airport; we flew via Bangkok Airport coming
here to France.
And it was it was a disaster at the airport;
it wasted about three-and-a-half hours of
our lives; it was a horrible horrible situation
at the airport.
And I never stopped smiling.
I never stopped laughing.
I was really kind of buoyed up by it and joyous
in dealing with it.
And, again, that's a side of my character,
you'd really have to know me to see it, you
have to live with me or work with me to see
it.
You'd never see it on YouTube or you'd never
get that sense from reading my essays, or
reading my written work, or even reading book-length
works from me.
I respond to those kinds of challenges not
with phony optimism, not with a contrived
cheerfulness; I'm really, actually happy in
dealing with it.
And I do have more extreme examples of that,
too.
I can think of there's one situation where
somebody was threatening to kill me was really
a credible threat somebody, was threatening
to murder me.
And I was smiling and laughing and happy and
so on.
If anything I had to try to behave less happy
than I was in dealing with it.
It wasn't contrived, I really felt that way.
The only philosopher I know to talk about
this (this aspect of my life, and I think
it's an aspect of other people's lives in
general) is actually the philosopher Max Stirner,
who also has a… there's a video on this
channel about his philosophy.
Max Stirner is the only guy I can remember
who talks about the obduracy of children and
the sense of oneself that develops when you
face up to challenges when you defy things
that maybe at first as a child seemed impossible
to defy.
Stirner talks about the fact that when you're
a child, presuming that your parents beat
you…
Not everyone is beaten by their parents but
millions of us are…
You know, as soon as the child figures out
the look in the parent's eye that means you
are going to be beaten, then the look in the
eye is more terrifying than the stick or the
fist, because you know what that look in their
eye means.
First you learn to fear the stick, then you
learn to fear the fist, then you learn to
fear the look in a person's eye.
But then, as childhood goes on and you develop
more of an awareness of yourself, of your
own strength, of your own tenacity, of your
own own obduracy, of your own will; then you
move on, and you learn to feel contempt for
the threat, the look in the eye, the fist,
the stick.
Then you learn to appreciate a sense of your
own strength, of your own ability to overcome
that challenge.
The awareness that you can be whipped and
you can be beaten, and you're stronger than
that.
And even if you weep that the tears are meaningless
and fleeting and so on.
I remember Max Stirner talking about the psychology
of childhood; he had some reflections on a
very peculiar form of happiness that, you
know, you might call thriving on misery.
But this sense of your own strength, this
sense of your own obduracy, this sense that
you can overcome this challenge that's in
front of you, and of being buoyed up by it,
of being happy about it.
That's an element of my character that certainly
came out during this strange situation at
the airport… three and a half hours of misery
at the airport, but I was not miserable.
My girlfriend was really asking me, you know,
my girlfriend was asking me how should she
behave.
She said, look, do you want me to pretend
to be happy?
I said, no, don't pretend: I'm not pretending.
I said, for me, I have a liberating feeling
of doing the best I can.
And doing the best you can means different
things to different people.
But as long as I am doing the best I can,
I know I can't do anything better than this,
so I don't suffer at all.
I'm not standing there in the airport worried
like, "Oh, am I going to miss my flight?
It's going to be all my fault."
I'm doing everything I can,
and then beyond that, I have that peculiar
low-level joy described described by Max Stirner
of knowing that I don't fear the fist, and
I don't fear the rod, and I don't fear the
look in the other person's eye that brings
those threats with them or what have you.
I enjoy the feeling of my own capacity to
cope, if you like.
And that is a durable form of happiness that
I have with me always and that I've experienced
in a lot of really extreme situations;
including, you know, threats of violence and
people threatening to kill me, or threats
that have to do with my livelihood or, you
know, impacting my life in some really significant
way otherwise.
And I guess for people who don't feel it,
it's difficult to describe.
And I guess for people who don't understand
it, looking in from the outside, they might
perceive me as reckless, but actually what
I'm doing is not reckless at all, it's perfectly
self-controlled.
And I would say further, I only feel that
way in situations where the nature of the
crisis is not my fault.
So I don't feel guilty for anything that's
going wrong at the airport: none of it's my
fault, and so on.
It would be much much different, obviously,
if I were in a situation where I was taking
care of my daughter, and there was a problem
that was my fault.
Then you have feelings of guilt and responsibility,
and I'd be aware of my own daughter's inability
to cope, which is very different from that
sense of joy in my own ability to cope.
So that is one sense, the ability to thrive
on misery, the ability to overcome obstacles
and have a feeling of one's own obduracy,
and being aware of one's own fearlessness
in dealing with problems that used to cause
fear (even if they were only things you would
have feared in childhood, or maybe things
you would have feared when you were younger
and more inexperienced as a teenager, in your
early twenties, whatever the case may be).
You can think of your own examples here.
But there is still some sense in which I do
identify with the critique of happiness presented
by Arthur Schopenhauer, presented by Theravada
Buddhism.
I find myself walking the streets here of
the Côte d'Azur, this beautiful part of France,
and yes, the idea that somebody would be captivated
by the sight of a yacht, of an expensive boat,
and think that they want that to be happy
[is absurd to me];
we're passed on the street by very expensive
cars (Ferraris and Porsches and what have
you), the idea that somebody would see that
and desire that and would take that on as
a goal; the idea that someone like myself
might come here and then go back to Canada
and feel motivated that they have to save
up money so that one day they can be the person
in the yacht or they can be the person in
the fancy car with an apartment here in the
South of France, on the beach, that is contemptible
to me in a sense that's shallow and profound
at the same time.
But I can't even say that is something I believe,
or something that I have chosen.
I really think that's an aesthetic difference
between myself and other people more than
it even as a moral difference or a choice.
None of those things; I'm not drawn to any
of those things; I never have been and I think
I never could be.
When I first enrolled in University (the University
of Toronto), my major was economics.
When people asked me why, I answered, because
I wanted to study the philosophy of poverty.
I've always been drawn to poverty.
I've always been drawn to the devastation
of war; the post-war struggle, the struggle
to reconstruct a society after a disaster,
war or famine.
I've always been concerned about genocide,
including the slow-motion genocide about against
Canada's own people, questions of endangered
languages enduring, and the injustice is of
the British Empire in creating Canada, the
country I was born into, and so on.
But, we can talk about those things philosophically
we can talk about them politically, but I
can also just say there's a level on which
it's aesthetic.
And the truth is my parents brought me to
France when I was a child, they brought me
to Italy and few other parts of Europe; I
saw all this splendor, and to me there was
nothing splendid in it.
And I was never interested in having a life
lived in pursuit of those creature comforts.
I wanted a life that was full of suffering
and defined by suffering but where it was
meaningful suffering.
I wanted to live a meaningful life as I defined
it.
And I did that.
I can tell you honestly that if I die tomorrow
or if I died yesterday, I did live a meaningful
life already, by my own definition.
And now I'm moving on to a very new and different
chapter of my life.
I say this as the floor is covered with toys
for my daughter.
We spent about eight hours today with my daughter,
going to the beach and sitting on this floor,
playing with these toys, and played some video
games, too, and so on.
It's taken on a new dimension and a new direction.
But no, my life has never been about happiness,
and that's both the short and the long answer
to that question.